all right now we need to learn a new cut
I've already done what I can do and the
pulling cut is probably going to leave
some tool marks behind and remember when
I was talking about scraping and the
90-degree rule and how I closed that
flute up and the bottom edge would never
touch the wood at less at more than 90
degrees always less you know all that
conversation was talking about scraping
alright now what we're gonna do is add
cheer to our scraping coat now this is
spelled correctly shear meaning scrape
on a steep slope so this is not the
shear that would be spelled for shearing
scissors and cutting actions and things
like this so this just means scrape on a
steep slope so we're gonna take that
same scraping cut we're gonna roll that
flute over get the top closed but we're
gonna lower the handle and get a 45
degree peeling action again I'm going to
use my pencil trick to slice the fibers
downhill but with the scraping action of
the burr now so whenever I on the
outside of the bowl whenever I'm on the
outside of the bowl I'll always have my
handle down and the flute pointing in
the direction so that the 45 degree
shearing angle is always going downhill
we're gonna lower the handle way down
here and I'm gonna close the flute and
I'm gonna be on a 45 degree angle with
the slicing edge now we have a whole new
attitude to think about here this is not
a cut that's going to take much wood
away it's very delicate very deliberate
very slow pace I'm going to tuck my
elbows in I'm gonna use my whole body
and I'm going to use my legs and my
torso to move on an arc of that bowl
there's no pressure in on the wood I'm
just waiting and just kissing the fibers
just ever so gently every part of my
body is just moving with the tool
so tour us I got some issues here first
of all I wish I had a better tool rest
because this is pushing me way away here
but we'll have to deal with that but
there's another issue in the shoe scrape
that's much much different than any
other of the tools in the shoe scrape I
have the handle down and the tool
becomes perpendicular to the tool rest
I don't tuck the tool rest in right
close to the wood it's always easier to
get the handle down if my tool is
perpendicular to the tourists now once I
come way over here then I find well I
have trouble getting the handle down the
tourist gets in its own way so I'll have
to move it to come around that part of
it so while the tool rest is in this
position I can only reach maybe the
bottom half of this efficiently if I
stop in one place here it's just gonna
make a divot it's gonna cut a groove in
it if I go too fast it'll leave a
spiraling mark behind so it's just a
very slow deliberate pace and tucked my
arms in get in a comfortable pit
position up on the ball of my feet and
just very gently and if we can see some
of these fibers you see how delicate
these fibers are I'm not taking much
wood away little tiny angel hairs right
and now any of those tool marks and if
you notice I'm actually going both ways
I'm violating the go downhill rule by
moving across the Taurus the wrong way
but the peeling action is peeling it the
correct way so I can actually go the
wrong way and in some cases it's even
easier to get a clean cut going the
wrong way the way the the woods being
removed okay so now that's a pretty
smooth area right in there I want to get
the rest of it around here so I got to
move my tool rust
so that I can get perpendicular to the
tool and still reach this position here
you hear that a little bit of outer
roundness already from that wood drying
all right now the trick here is to go
right out soom right out in the plane
the angle of that flow of that bowl not
I don't I'm not pushing into it to round
that off so it's a very light cut out
and back again and back out into the air
spaces and then back out again the trick
to this is to start a cut go through a
bad spot where a bump or an undulation
is and exit a cut without making of
starting in an entry entering an exit
point and making two more divots so it's
very deliberate very soft and I think it
was David Ellsworth that coined the
phrase dance with your lathe because of
this kind of a cut of using your whole
body
there's no rookie jerkiness of my arms
here at all that little tiny burr on
there is acting like it's just a little
microscopic bowl gouge and it's going to
get worn away really quickly and so we
have to go sharpen often I've already
scraped this for a little while my tool
is dull I'm gonna have to go sharpen I'm
gonna use the bowl gouge as a scraper
and I've got a wide area here to use it
in I can go all the way from the heel
all the way to the toe as a scraper so I
break this down in my mind just kind of
mentally break it into thirds and I'll
take the front half the front third and
I'll do a little shear scraping there
and they'll get dull and I'll take the
middle of it and that'll get dull and I
take down by the heel and that'll get
dull we can't use the the point here
that will cause a divot or the tip
changes the radius and won't be scraping
anymore but all that in-between is fair
game but we have to use it
as a sharp tool so let me stop again and
go sharpen and lower the handle brand
new burner now tuck it in
now this cuts really deliberate in fact
it's so deliberate I've got to remind
myself to breathe sometimes that I've
been holding my breath all this time
trying to make this perfect arc with my
body moving just very slightly along the
surface of that I'm holding it down on
the tool rest and using my body to make
that arc